Acid	Having a pH value of less than 7.
Adaptation	The ability of a species to survive in a particular environment because of alterations of form or behavior brought about through natural selection.
Allele	A genetic code that represents a specific trait.
Amplitude	Greatness of size; magnitude.  The high point in a wave.
Asexual reproduction	Involves one parent and leads to offspring that are genetically identical to the parent and to one another.
Atoms	The basic unit of matter consisting of a dense central nucleus surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons.
Attributes	A characteristic of a thing.
Base	Having a pH value of more than 7.
Boiling point	The temperature at which a liquid becomes a gas. The boiling point changes as pressure changes.
Bond	A force linking atoms.
Change of state or phase	A change from one state (solid or liquid or gas) to another without a change in chemical composition.
Chemical change	The altering of an object's chemical composition (changing what it is made of).
Chemical energy	Energy liberated by a chemical reaction or absorbed in the formation of a chemical compound.
Chemical equation	A symbolic representation of a chemical reaction.
Chemical properties	Any of a material's properties, such as color, pH, boiling point, melting point, density, or it's ability to react with another material.
Chemical (change) reaction	A process in which atoms rearrange themselves to form a new substance.
Chromosome	Circular strand of DNA that contains the hereditary information necessary for cell life.
Closed system	A system in which matter may circulate, but may not enter or leave.
Compound	A substance consisting of two or more different elements chemically bonded together.
Compressional wave	Having the same direction of vibration along their direction of travel.
Concept	The general notion or idea.
Concept map	A visual representation of concepts in a figure, using boxes, arrows, and other symbols to help show relationships between different items. It is a graphical tool for organizing and representing knowledge.
Conclusion	A final statement of the findings of an investigative process that is supported by investigative evidence (data).
Conduction	The transfer of heat from one object to another though direct contact.
Conductor	A substance, body, or device that readily conducts heat, electricity, sound, etc.
Conservation of Mass (energy)	A physical law stating that the total amount of mass remains constant. Also stated as: mass can be neither created nor destroyed during a chemical reaction—only rearranged.
Convection	The transfer of heat by the movement of particles in a substance.
Crest	The height of a wave.
 Current	The flow of electricity through a conductor.
Density	The amount of mass per unit volume.
Dissolve	To make a solution of by mixing with a liquid.
Distance	The measured space between two objects.
Diversity of species	Measure within an ecological community that incorporates both the number of species in a community and the evenness of abundance of species.
DNA	The large molecules inside the nucleus of living cells that carry genetic information.
Electrical energy	Energy made available by the flow of electric charge through a conductor.
Electron	A particle of an atom that carries a negative charge.
Electromagnetic spectrum	The entire range of wavelengths or frequencies extending from gamma rays to the longest radio waves and including visible light.
Element	A pure chemical substance composed of all atoms that have the same number of protons.
Energy	The amount of work that can be done by a force.
Energy levels	The location within in an electron cloud where electrons orbit the nucleus.
Energy transfer	The movement of energy from one location to another.
Energy transformation	The change of energy from one form to another.
English System	A standard system of measurements based on the inch, pound and Fahrenheit degrees.  Primarily used in the United States and England.
Evidence	A thing or things helpful in forming a conclusion or judgment.  Proof.
Evolution	The change in the gene pool through a series of gradual or rapid changes of a population from generation to generation by such processes as mutation, natural selection, and genetic drift accounting for the current diversity of species.
Extinction	The death of all members of a species of plant or animal. It is generally considered to be the death of the last individual of that species, although the capacity to breed and recover may have been lost before this point.
Formula	A group of symbols that represent a compound.
Fossil record	The total make up of fossilized artifacts and their placement within earth’s rock layers.  It provides information about the history of life on earth.
Frequency	The number of occurrences within a given period of time.
Gas	a fluid (as air) that has neither independent shape nor volume but tends to expand indefinitely.
Gene	A segment of inheritance information that specifies a trait.
Genetic	Something inherited or affected by genes.
Genetic information	A set of instructions coded in DNA molecules that specifies the traits of an organism.
Genetic mutation	Occurs when a DNA gene is damaged or changed in such a way that alters the genetic message being carried by that gene.
Genetic variation	A measure of the tendency of individual genotypes in a population to vary from one to another.
Genotype	The genetic makeup code received from the parent for specific traits.
Gravitational potential	The amount of work which must be done against gravitational forces to move an object to a specified position from a reference position.
Heat	A form of kinetic energy produced by the motion of atoms and molecules and may be transferred from one body or system to another due to a difference in temperature.
Heredity	The passing of traits to offspring. This is the process by which an offspring cell or organism acquires the characteristics of its parent cell or organism.
Heterogeneous	Consisting of diverse ingredients.
Homogenous	Consisting of the same or similar ingredients.
Indicator	A substance that specifies the degree of acidity or basicity of a solution.
Input	The addition of matter, energy, or information to a system.
Insulator	A material that is a poor conductor of energy such as electricity or heat.
Intrinsic	Anatomy. (of certain muscles, nerves, etc.) belonging to or lying within a given part.
Kinetic energy	The energy of motion.
Law	An observed regularity of the natural world that scientists have observed repeatedly and can be used to accurately predict what will happen in many situations.
Lens	The transparent body behind the iris in the eye that’s role is to focus light on the retina.
Light	Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation that can be seen with the human eye.
Liquid	A fluid that takes the shape of the part of the container that it occupies, and that forms a distinct surface.
Logical argument	A set of one or more assumptions supported by evidence that leads to a clear conclusion.
Magnetism	The properties of attraction possessed by magnets; the molecular properties common to magnets.
Mass	The amount of matter inside an object.
Measure	How much there is or how many there are of something that you can quantify.
Mechanical wave	A wave that requires a medium to pass through.
Melting point	The temperature at which a solid melts and becomes a liquid.
Mendelian genetics	Refers to the transmission of hereditary characteristics from parent organisms to their offspring; it underlies much of genetics.
Metric system	The numerical system of choice for scientists. It is based on powers of ten used by the majority of the world, therefore is adopted as a way to communicate data in a standard form in the international community.
 Mixture	A portion of matter consisting of two or more substances in varying proportions that retain their own properties.
Molecule	A stable unit of two or more atoms held together by chemical bonds.
Natural selection	The process by which heritable traits that are favored by environmental conditions become more common in successive generations, and heritable traits that are less favored by environmental conditions become less common. Over time, this process may result in the emergence of new species.
Neutron	A particle of an atom that carries a neutral charge.
Nuclear energy	The energy from nuclei.
Nucleus (In biology)	The part of the cell containing DNA and RNA and responsible for growth and reproduction.
Nucleus (In physics)	The central structure in an atom that contains neutrons and protons.
Offspring	The immediate descendants of a parent.
Open system	A system in which matter may flow in and out, as opposed to a closed system in which matter may not flow in or out.
Output	Matter, energy, or information that flows out of a system.
Parallel circuit	A closed circuit in which the current divides into two or more paths before recombining to complete the circuit
Periodic table	A tabular arrangement of the elements according to their atomic numbers so that elements with similar properties are in the same column
pH	The measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution.
Phase	Any of the forms or states in which matter can exist, depending on temperature or pressure.
Phenotype	What an organism looks like as a consequence of the interaction of its genotype and the environment.
Physical change	Any change not involving modification of a substance's chemical identity, such as a change of state from solid to liquid,  a change in appearance or a change is size or color.
Physical property	Any property used to characterize matter and energy and their interactions most often observed by using the senses.
Plasma	A collection of charged particles exhibiting some properties of a gas but differing from a gas in being a good conductor of electricity and in being affected by a magnetic field.
Potential energy	Stored energy.
Population	All the organisms inhabiting a specified area.
Principle	Rule or law concerning the functioning of systems of the natural world.
Product	The results of a chemical reaction.
Properties	Essential attributes shared by all members of a group.
Proton	A particle of an atom located inside the nucleus that carries a positive charge.
Punnett square	A diagram that is used to predict an outcome of a particular cross or breeding experiment.
Pupil	The whole in the center of the iris that allows light into the eye.
Radiant energy	The energy of electromagnetic waves.
Radiation	The process in which energy particles travel through a medium or space.
Rarefaction	The reduction of the medium’s density, the opposite of compression.
Reactant	Any substance that undergoes a chemical change in a given reaction.
Reflection	The change in direction of a wave at a surface so that the wave returns into the medium from which it originated.
Refraction	The change in direction of a wave due to a change in its speed.
Reproduction	The natural process among organisms by which new individuals are generated and the species perpetuated.
Retina	The light sensitive tissue lining the inner surface of the eye.
Series circuit	Components connected in row are connected along a single path, so the same current flows through all of the components.
Sexual reproduction	The production of new generations involving the combination of chromosomes from both a male and female parent. Because each parent contributes genetic information, the offspring of sexual reproduction are usually not identical to either parent.
Simulation	Imitation or enactment, as of something anticipated or in testing.
Skepticism	The attitude in scientific thinking that emphasizes that no fact or principle can be known with complete certainty; the tenet that all knowledge is uncertain.
Solid	The state of matter characterized by resistance to deformation and changes of volume.
Solubility	The ability of a given substance to dissolve in a liquid.
Solute	 A substance which is dissolved within a solution.
Solution (process)	A device or process created through technological design to meet a human need or want.
Solution (physical science)	A mixture in which particles of one subsnace are evenly distributed through another substance.
Solvent	A substance that dissolves another to form a solution.
Sound	A mechanical wave composed of frequencies within the range of hearing.
States of matter	Matter can exist in various states (or forms), which may depend on temperature and pressure. Traditionally, three states of matter are recognized: solid, which maintains a fixed volume and shape; liquid, which maintains a fixed volume but adopts the shape of its container; and gas, which occupies the entire volume available. Plasma, or ionized gas, is a fourth state that occurs at very high temperatures.
Sublimation	A change in state or phase whereby a substance moves from solid to gas phase without going through liquid phase.
Substance	That of which a thing consists; physical matter or material.
Symbol	Represents the name of an element on a periodic table.
System	A collection of things that have some influence on one another and the whole.
Temperature	  The measurement of the average kinetic energy of the molecules in an object or system.
Theory of Evolution	Explains the facts of biological evolution in terms of the law of natural selection and the facts and laws of genetics.  Scientists use this theory to explain how the current diversity of living things came into existence and the relationships between modern organisms and their more "primitive" ancestors.
Thermal Energy	The movement of atoms and molecules in matter. It is a form of kinetic energy produced from the random movements of those molecules. Thermal energy of a system can be increased or decreased.
Trait	A distinguishing characteristic or quality.
Transfer	Move from one place to another.
Transverse wave	A moving wave that consists of oscillations occurring perpendicular to the direction of energy transfer.
Trough	 The low point in a wave.
Validity	Measuring what you claim to be measuring through tightly controlled conditions with an emphasis on quality by checking and questioning the observations or data and discussing their accuracy.
Variation	A measure of the tendency of individuals in a population to differ from one another.
Visible Light	Electromagnetic radiation to which the organs of sight react, ranging in wavelength from about 400 to 700 nm, considered variously as a wave.
Volume	The amount of the three-dimensional space enclosed within or occupied by an object, geometric solid, etc.
Voltage	The representation of the electric potential energy per unit charge.
Wave	A disturbance that propagates through space and time, usually with transference of energy. 
Wavelength	The distance between one peak or crest of a wave and the next peak or crest. It is equal to the speed of the wave divided by its frequency, and to the speed of a wave times its period.
Weight	The strength of the gravitational pull on an object.
Absolute Zero	Zero on the Kelvin scale represents -273°C.
Acceleration	the rate at which velocity changes
Accuracy	how close a measurement is to the true or accepted value
Acids	a substance that tastes sour, reacts with metals and carbonates, and turns blue litmus paper red
Acoustics	The study of how sounds interact with each other and the environment.
Activation Energy	the minimum amount of energy needed to start a chemical reaction
Air Resistance	the fluid friction experienced by objects falling through the air
Alkali Metals	the metals in Group 1 of the periodic table
Alkaline Earth Metals	the metals in Group 2 of the periodic table
Alloy	a mixture made of two or more elements that has the properties of metals (generally stronger and less likely to react with air or water than are pure metals from which they are made)
Alpha Particle	consists of two protons and two neutrons and is positively charged (release of this particle by an atom decreases the atomic number by 2 and the mass number by 4)
Alternating Current	Current consisting of charges that move back and forth in a circuit
Ammeter	a device used to measure current in a circuit
Amorphous Solids	a solid made up of particles that are not arranged in a regular pattern
Amplitude	The maximum distance that the particles of the the medium carrying the wave move away from their rest position.
Amplitude Modulation	A method of transmitting signals by changing the amplitude of a wave.
Antinode	The points of maximum amplitude on a standing wave.
Archimedes' Principle	states that the buoyant force acting on a submerged object is equal to the weight of the fluid the object displaces
Atom	the smallest particle of an element
Atom	the basic particle from which all elements are made
Atom	the basic particle from which all elements are made
Atomic Mass	the average mass of all the isotopes of an element
Atomic Number	the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom
Aurora	a glowing region produced by the interaction of charged particles from the sun and atoms in the atmosphere
Average Speed	the total distance traveled divided by the total time
Balanced Forces	equal forces acting on one object in opposite directions (equal but opposite forces)
Barometer	an instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure
Bases	a substance that tastes bitter, feels slippery, and turns red litmus paper blue
Battery	a combination of two or more electrochemical cells in a series
Bernoulli's Principle	states that the faster a fluid moves, the less pressure the fluid exerts
Beta Particle	a fast-moving electron giving off by a nucleus during radioactive decay (release of this particle by an atom results in its atomic number increasing by 1
Boiling	When vaporization occurs below the surface of a liquid.
Boiling	(another kind of vaporization) occurs when a liquid changes to a gas below its surface as well as at the surface
Boiling Point	the temperature at which liquid boils
Boyle's Law	a principle that describes the relationship between the pressure and volume of a gas at constant tempreature
Buoyant Force	the upward force exerted by a fluid on a submerged object
Camera	equipment for taking photographs (usually consisting of a lightproof box with a lens at one end and light-sensitive film at the other)
Catalyst	a material that increases the rate of a reaction by lowering the activation energy
Celsius Scale	The most commonly used scale in nearly all the the countries.
Centripetal Force	any force that causes an object to move in a circular path
Change of State	The physical change from one state of matter to another.
Charles's Law	a principle that describes the relationship between the temperature and volume of a gas at constant pressure
Chemical Bond	a force of attraction between two atoms
Chemical Bond	the force of attraction that holds two atoms together as a result of the rearrangement of electrons between them
Chemical Change	a change in matter that produces one or more new substances (produces new substances with properties different from those of the original substance)
Chemical Digestion	breaks larger molecules in food into smaller ones
Chemical Energy	a form of potential energy that is stored in chemical bonds between atoms
Chemical Energy	The Potential energy that is stored in the chemical bonds that hold chemical compounds together.
Chemical Energy	the internal energy stored in the chemical bonds between atoms (a form of potential energy)
Chemical Equation	a short, easy way to show a chemical reaction, using symbols instead of words
Chemical Formula	a combination of symbols that shows the ration of elements in a compound
Chemical Formula	shows the elements in the compound and the ratio of atoms
Chemical Property	a characteristic of a pure substance that describes its ability to change into different substances
Chemical Reaction	a change in matter that produces one or more new substances (another word for chemical change)
Chemical Reaction	the process by which one or more substances change to produce one or more different substances
Chemical Symbol	a one or two letter representation of an element
Chemistry	the study of the properties of matter and how matter changes
Circuit Breaker	A reusable safety switch that breaks the circuit when the current becomes too high.
Closed Systems	matter is not allowed to enter or leave
Cochlea	A fluid-filled cavity shaped like a snail shell.
Coefficient	a number placed in front of a chemical formula in an equation
Colloid	a mixture containing small, undissolved particles that do not settle out
Combustion	a rapid reaction between oxygen and a fuel
Combustion	The process of burning fossil fuels.
Communicating	sharing ideas and conclusions with others through writing and speaking (sharing the process you used in your inquiry)
Compass	a device with a magnetized needle that can spin freely
Complementary Color	A color directly opposite another on a color wheel and providing the greatest chromatic contrast to it.
Compound	a pure substance made of two or more elements chemically combined in a set ratio
Compound Machine	A machine that utilizes two or more simple machines.
Compression	The parts where the coils are close together.
Concave Lens	A lens that is thinner in the center than at the edges
Concave Mirror	A mirror that curves inward
Concentrated Solution	a mixture that has a lot of solute dissolved in the solvent
Concentration	the amount of a substance in a given volume
Condensation	A change from the gas state to a liquid state.
Condensation	the opposite of vaporization (the from the gaseous to liquid state of matter)
Conduction	the transfer of thermal energy from one substance to another through direct contact
Conduction	The transfer of heat from one particle f matter to another without the movement of the matter.
Conductivity	the ability of an object to transfer heat of electricity to another object
Conductor	a material that conducts heat well
Conductor	A material that conducts heat well.
Cones	Cells in the retina that respond to and detect color
Conservation of Charge	the law that states that charges are neither created nor destroyed but only transferred from one material to another
Conservation of Mass	states that during a chemical reaction, matter is not created or destroyed
Constructive Interference	The interference when waves combine to make a wave with a larger amplitude.
Controlled Experiment	an investigation in which all variables except one remain the same
Convection	Heat that is transferred by the movements of currents within a fluid.
Convection Current	A convection flow that creates a circular motion.
Convex Lens	A lens that is thicker in the center than at the edges
Convex Mirror	A mirror that curves outward
Cornea	Transparent surface of the eye
Corrosion	the gradual wearing away of a metal element due to a chemical reaction
Corrosive	the way in which acids react with some metals so as to eat away the metal
Covalent Bond	the chemical bond formed when two atoms share electrons
Crest	The highest point of a transverse wave.
Crystal	an orderly, three-dimensional pattern of ions or atoms in a solid
Crystalline Solids	a solid that is made up of crystals in which particles are arranged in a regular, repeating pattern
Data	the facts, figures, and other evidence gathered through observations
Decibel (dB)	The measure of loudness.
Decomposition	when compounds break down into simpler products
Density	the ratio of the mass of a substance to its volume
Density = Mass ÷ Volume
Density	How much matter, or mass, there is in a given amount of space or volume.
Density	Density = Mass ÷ Volume
Destructive Interference	The interference that occurs when two waves combine to make a wave with a smaller amplitude.
Diatomic Molecule	a molecule that consists of two atoms
Diffraction	When a wave moves around a barrier or through an opening in a barrier, it bends and spreads out.
Diffuse Reflection	Reflection that occurs when parallel rays of light hit a rough surface and all reflect at different angles
Digestion	breaks down the complex molecules of foods into smaller molecules
Dilute Solution	a mixture that has only a little solute dissolved in a certain amount of solvent
Direct Current	current consisting of charges that flow in only one direction in a circuit
Directly Proportional	when a graph of two variables is a straight line passing through the origin, it is said to be "directly proportional"
Doppler Effect	The change in frequency of a wave as its source moves in relation to an observer.
Double Bond	a chemical bond formed when atoms share two pairs of electrons
Dry Cell	an electrochemical cell in which the electrolyte is a paste
Ductile	describes a material that can be pulled out, or drawn, into a long wire
Ear Canal	It collects sound waves and directs them into a narrow region.
Eardrum	A small, tightly stretched, drum-like membrane.
Echo	A reflected sound wave.
Echolocation	The use f reflected sound waves to determine distances or to locate objects.
Efficiency	It compares the output work to the input work and is expressed in a percentage.
Elasticity	The ability of a material to bounce back after being disturbed.
Elastic Potential Energy	The potential energy associated with objects that can be stretched or compressed.
Electrical Energy	the energy of electrically charged particles from one place to another
Electrical Energy	the energy of moving electric charges
Electrical Energy	The energy of electric charges.
Electric Circuit	a complete, unbroken path through which electric charges can flow
Electric Field	the region around a charged object where the object's electric force interacts with other charged objects
Electric Force	the attraction or repulsion between electric charges
Electric Generator	a device that converts mechanical energy into electrical energy
Electric Motor	A device that transforms electrical energy into mechanical energy
Electrochemical Cell	device that changes chemical energy into electrical energy
Electrodes	a metal strip that conducts electricity; a metal part of an electrochemical cell, which gains or loses electrons
Electrolyte	A liquid or paste that conducts electric current.
Electromagnet	A magnet created by wrapping a coil of wire with a current around a ferromagnetic core
Electromagnetic Energy	a form of energy that travels through space as waves
Electromagnetic energy	Energy that travels in waves.
Electromagnetic Induction	The process of generating an electric current from the motion of a conductor through a magnetic field
Electromagnetic Radiation	The energy transferred through space by electromagnetic waves.
Electromagnetic Spectrum	The complete range of electromagnetic waves placed in order of increasing frequency.
Electromagnetic Wave	Transverse Waves that transfer electrical and magnetic energy.
Electromagnetism	The relationship between electricity and magnetism
Electron	a negatively charged subatomic particle that is found outside the nucleus of an atom
Electron Dot Diagram	includes the symbol for the element surrounded by dots
Electrons	the negatively charged particles that are found outside the nucleus of an atom
Element	a pure substance that cannot be broken down into any other substances by chemical or physical means (simplest substances)
Element	any of the more than 100 known substances (of which 92 occur naturally) that cannot be separated into simpler substances and that singly or in combination constitute all matter
Endothermic Change	a change in which energy is taken in
Endothermic Reaction	a reaction in which energy is absorbed
Energy	the ability to do work or cause change
Energy	The ability to do work.
Energy	The ability to do work or cause change.
Energy	the ability to do work or cause change
Energy Level	the specific amount of energy an electron has
Energy Transformation	A change from one form of energy to another.
Enzymes	a biological catalyst that lowers the activation energy of reactions in cells
Estimate	an approximation of a number based on reasonable assumptions
Evaporation	(another kind of vaporization) vaporization that takes place only on the surface of a liquid
Evaporation	The change of state from liquid to a gas.
Exothermic Change	a change in which energy is released
Exothermic Reaction	a reaction that releases energy
External Combustion Engine	Engines that burn fuel out side the engine in a boiler.
Eyepiece	combination of lenses at the viewing end of optical instruments
Fahrenheit Scale	The most commonly used temperature scale in the US.
Farsighted	term applied to a person who has trouble focusing on nearby objects because the eyeball is so short that images form behind the retina
Ferromagnetic Material	A material that is strongly attracted to a magnet, and which can be made into a magnet.
Fluid	a material that can easily flow (a gas can be a fluid)
Fluid Friction	occurs when a solid object moves through a fluid
Fluorescent Light	Light bulb that glows when an electric current causes ultraviolet rays to strike a coating inside a tube.
Focal Point	a point of convergence of light (or other radiation) or a point from which it diverges
Force	a push or a pull
Fossil Fuel	Examples are: coal, petroleum (oil), and natural gas.
Free Fall	when the only force acting on an object is gravity
Freezing	the change of state from liquid to solid
Frequency	The number of complete waves that pass a given point in a certain amount of time.
Frezing	The change of state from a liquid to a solid.
Friction	the force that two surfaces exert on each other when they rub against each other
Friction	the force that opposes the motion of one surface as it moves across another surface
Fuel	a material that releases energy when it burns
Fulcrum	The fixed point that a lever pivots around.
Fundamental Tone	The lowest natural frequency of an object.
Fuse	A safety device with a thin metal strip that will melt if too much current passes through a circuit.
Galvanometer	A device that uses an electromagnet to detect small amounts of current
Gamma Radiation	a type of nuclear radiation made of high-energy waves (causes no change in atomic mass or atomic number)
Gamma Rays	Electromagnetic waves with the shortest wavelengths and the highest frequencies.
Gas	has no definite volume or shape
Graph	a diagram that tells how two variables, or factors that change, are related
Gravitational Potential Energy	Potential energy related to a object's height.
Gravity	a force that pulls objects toward each other
Grounded	allowing charges to flow directly from the circuit into Earth in the event of a short circuit
Groups	the 18 vertical columns in the periodic table
Halogens	the elements in Group 17 of the periodic table
Heat	Thermal energy that is transferred from matter at a higher temperature to matter at a lower temperature.
Heat Engine	The transformation of thermal energy to mechanical energy requires this machine.
Hertz (Hz)	Unit for frequency.
Heterogeneous Mixture	you can see the different parts
Hologram	3-dimensional photograph created with lasers.
Homogeneous Mixture	the substances are so evenly mixed, that you can't see the different parts
Hydraulic System	uses liquids o transmit pressure in a confined fluid
Hydrogen Ion (H⁺)	an atom of hydrogen that has lost its electron
Hydroxide Ion (OH⁻)	an negatively charged ion made of oxygen and hydrogen
Hypothesis	a possible answer to a scientific question or explanation for a set of observations
Illuminated	lit up
Image	A copy of an object formed by reflected or refracted light.
Inclined Plane	A flat, sloped surface.
Index of Refraction	A measure of the amount a ray of light bends when it passes from one medium to another.
Indicator	a compound that changes color when in contact with an acid or base
Induction	A method of charging an object by means of the electric field of another object
Inertia	the tendency of an object to resist change in motion
Inferring	making an inference (an interpretation based on observations and prior knowledge)
Infrared Rays	Electromagnetic waves with wavelengths shorter than radio waves, but longer than visible light.
Infrasound	Sounds with frequencies below the human range of hearing.
Inhibitor	a material used to decrease the rate of a reaction
Input Force	The force that you exert on a machine.
Input Work	The input force times the input distance.
Instantaneous Speed	the rate at which an object is moving at a given instant in time
Insulator	A material that does not conduct heat well.
Insulator	a material that doesn't conduct heat well
Intensity	The amount of energy a sound wave carries per second through a unit area.
Interference	The interaction when waves meet.
Internal Combustion Engine	Engines that burn fuel in cylinders inside the engine.
International System of Units (SI Units)	a system that scientists use to measure the properties of matter
Ion	an atom or group of atoms that has an electric charge
Ionic Bond	the attraction between two oppositely charged ions (form as a result of the attraction between positive and negative ions)
Ionic Compound	a compound that consists of positive and negative ions
Iris	The ring of muscle that controls=s the size of the pupil and gives the eye its color.
Isotopes	atoms with the same number of protons and a different number of neutrons
Joule	The amount of work you do when you exert a force of one newton to move an object a distance of one meter.
Kelvin Scale	The temperature scale most commonly used in physical science.
Kinetic Energy	The energy an object has due to its motion.
Kinetic Energy	the energy of matter in motion
Larynx	Your voice box.
Laser	A device that produces a narrow beam of coherent light.
Law of Conservation of Mass	the fact that matter is not created or destroyed in any chemical or physical change
Law of Conservation of Momentum	states that in the absence of outside forces, the total momentum of objects that interact does not change (the amount of momentum is the same before and after they interact)
Law of Conservation of Nuclear Energy	Energy cannot be created or destroyed.
Law of Reflection	States that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection.
Lens	A curved piece of a transparent material used to refract light
Lever	A rigid bar that is free to pivot, or rotate, on a fixed point.
Lift	an upward force
Liquid	has a definite volume, but not a definite shape
Longitudinal Wave	They move the medium parallel to the direction in which the waves travel.
Loudness	It describes your perception of the energy of a sound.
Machine	It is device that allows you to do work in a way that is easier.
Magnet	any material that attracts iron or materials containing iron
Magnetic Declination	the angle between geographic north and the north to which a compass needle points
Magnetic Domain	a region in which the magnetic fields of all atoms are lined up in the same direction.
Magnetic Field Lines	invisible lines that map out the magnetic field around a magnet
Magnetic Force	a force produced when magnetic poles interact
Magnetic Pole	the ends of a magnetic object, where the magnetic force is strongest
Magnetosphere	the region of earth's magnetic field shaped by the solar wind
Malleable	describes a material that can be hammered or rolled into other shapes
Manipulated Variable	the variable that is changed in an experiment
Mass	the measurement of the amount of matter in the object
Mass Number	the sum of the protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
Matter	Anything that has mass and takes up space.
Matter	anything that has mass and takes up space
Mean	numerical average
Mechanical Advantage	The number of times a machine increases a force exerted on it.
Mechanical Digestion	a physical process in which large pieces of food are ton and ground into smaller pieces
Mechanical Energy	kinetic or potential energy associated with the motion or position of an object
Mechanical Energy	Tthe form of energy associated with the position and motion of an object.
Mechanical Wave	Waves that require a medium through which to travel.
Median	middle number in a set of data
Medium	The material through which a wave travels through.
Melting	The change of state from a solid to a liquid.
Melting	the change of state from solid to liquid
Melting Point	the temperature at which a substance changes from a solid to a liquid
Metallic Bond	an attraction between a positive metal ion and the electrons surrounding it
Metalloids	have some characteristics of both metals and nonmetals
Metals	a class of elements characterized by physical properties that include shininess, malleability, ductility, and conductivity
Meter	the SI unit of length
Microscope	An optical instrument that forms enlarged images of tiny objects.
Microwaves	Radio waves with the shortest wavelengths and the highest frequency.
Mirage	An image of a distant object caused by refraction of light as it travels through air of varying temperature.
Mixture	made of two or more substances (elements, compounds, or both) that are together in the same place but are not chemically combined (can be separated by physical means)
Mode	the number that appears the most often in a list of numbers
Molecular Compound	a compound that is composed of molecules
Molecule	a neutral group of atoms joined by covalent bonds
Molecules	a neutral particle made of two or more atoms joined by covalent bonds
Momentum	Momentum = Mass x Velocity
Motion	the state in which one object's distance from another is changing (an object is in motion if it changes position relative to a reference point)
Music	A set of notes that combine in patters that are pleasing.
Nearsighted	when the eye is too long and the lens focusses the light in front of the retina
Neon Light	Glass tube containing neon gas that produces light.
Net Force	the combination of all forces acting on an object
Neutralization	a reaction of an acid with a base, yielding a solution that is not as acidic or basic as the starting solutions were
Neutron	a small particle in the nucleus of the atom (electrically neutral - no electric charge)
Neutron	A subatomic particle that has no charge and that is found in the nucleus of an atom
Newton	SI unit for force
Newton's First Law of Motion	states that an object at rest will remain at rest, and an object moving at a constant velocity will continue moving at a constant velocity, unless it is acted upon by an unbalanced force
Newton's Second Law of Motion	states that acceleration depends on the object's mass and on the net force acting on the object
Acceleration = Net Force ÷ Mass
Newton's Third Law of Motion	sates that if one object exerts a force on another object, then the second object exerts a force of equal strength in the opposite direction on the first object
Noble Gases	the elements in Group 18 of the periodic table
Node	The points of zero amplitude on a standing wave.
Nonmetal	an element that lacks most of the properties of a metal (most are poor conductors of electricity and heat and are reactive with other elements; solid ones are dull and brittle)
Nonpolar Bond	a covalent bond in which electrons are shared equally
Nuclear Energy	Potential energy that is stored in a nucleus of an atom.
Nuclear Fusion	a process in which two atomic nuclei combine, forming a larger nucleus and releasing huge amounts of energy (creates heavier elements)
Nucleus	the central core of the atom (contains neutrons and protons)
Nucleus	the positively charged dense center of an atom
Objective	A lens that gathers light and forms a real image.
Observing	using one or more senses to gather information
Ohm's Law	The law that states that resistance is equal to voltage divided by current.
Opaque Material	a material that reflects or absorbs all of the light that strikes it
Open System	matter can enter from or escape to the surroundings
Optical Axis	An imaginary line that divides a mirror in half.
Optical Fiber	A long, thin strand of glass or plastic that can carry light for long distances without allowing the light to escape.
Optic Nerve	Short, Thick nerve that carries signals from the eye to the brain.
Origin	The (0,0) point on a line graph
Output Force	The force the machine exerts on an object.
Output Work	The output force times the output distance.
Overtone	The object's natural frequencies.
Parallel Circuit	circuit in which electric current can follow more than one path
Particle Accelerators	a machine that moves atomic nuclei at higher and higher speeds until they crash into one another, sometimes forming heavier elements
Pascal	SI unit for pressure (N/m²)
Pascal's Principle	states that when a force is applied to a confined fluid, the change in pressure is transmitted equally to all parts of the fluid
Periodic Table	a chart of the elements showing the repeating pattern of their properties
Periods	the horizontal rows in the periodic table
Permanent Magnet	a magnet made from a material that keeps its magnetism for a long time
Photoelectric Effect	The ejection of electrons from a substance when light is shined on it.
Photon	A tiny particle or packet of light energy.
pH scale	a range of values from 0 to 14 that expresses the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution
Physical Change	any change that alters the form or appearance of matter but does not make any substance in the matter into a different substance
Physical Change	any change that alters the form or appearance of a substance but that does not make the substance into another substance
Physical Property	a characteristic of a pure substance that can be observed without changing it into another substance
Physics	the study of matter and energy and how they interact
Pigment	A colored chemical compound that absorbs light, producing color
Pitch	A description of how high or low the sound seems to a person.
Plane Mirror	A flat mirror that produces an upright, virtual image the same size as the object.
Plasma	a state of matter that consists of a gas-like mixture of free electrons and nuclei of atoms that have been stripped of electrons
Polar Bond	a covalent bond in which electrons are shared unequally
Polarized Light	Light that vibrates in only one direction.
Polyatomic Ions	ions that are made of more than one atom
Potential Energy	Stored energy that results from the position or shape of an object.
Potential Energy	the energy an object has because of its position
Power	the rate at which work is done
Power	It is the rate at work is done. Power equals the amount of work done on an object in a unit of time.
Precipitate	a solid that forms from solution during a chemical reaction
Precision	how close a group of measurements are to each other
Predicting	making a forecast of what will happen in the future based on past experience or evidence
Pressure	the force exerted on a surface divided by the total area over which the force is exerted
Pressure = Force ÷ Area
Pressure	the force exerted on a surface divided by the total area over which the force is exerted
Pressure = Force ÷ Area
Primary Color	Red, green, and blue, which can combine to produce white light and mixed in pairs produce the secondary colors: yellow, cyan, and magenta
Products	the new substances you have when the reaction is complete
Projectile	an object that is thrown
Proton	A subatomic particle that has a positive charge and that is found in the nucleus of an atom
Protons	the positively charged particles in the nucleus of an atom
Pulley	A simple machine that is made of a grooved wheel with a rope or cable wrapped around it.
Pupil	the adjustable opening in the center of the eye through which light enters.
P Wave	Longitudinal seismic waves.
Qualitative Observations	descriptions that don't involve numbers or measurements
Quantitative Observations	measurements; an observation that deals with a number or amount
Radar	A system that uses reflected radio waves to detect objects and measure their distances and speed.
Radiation	The transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves.
Radioactive Decay	the atomic nuclei of unstable isotopes release fast-moving particles and energy
Radioactivity	the spontaneous emission of radiation by an unstable atomic nucleus
Radio Waves	Electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies.
Rarefaction	The parts where the coils are spread out/rarefied.
Ray	A straight line used to represent a light wave.
Reactants	the substances you have at the beginning of a chemical reaction
Reactivity	the ease and speed with which an element combines, or reacts, with other elements and compounds
Real Image	An upside-down image formed where rays of light meet.
Reference Point	a place or object used for comparison to determine if something is in motion
Reflecting Telescope	A telescope that uses 2 concave lenses to gather light from distant objects.
Reflection	When an object or a wave hits a surface through which it cannot pass, it bounces back.
Refracting Telescope	A telescope that uses 2 convex lenses to form images.
Refraction	When a wave enters a new medium at an angle, one side of the wave changes speed before the other side, causing the wave to bend.
Refrigerant	A substance that absorbs and releases heat in a refrigerator.
Regular Reflection	Reflection that occurs when parallel rays of light hit a smooth surface and all reflect at the same angle
Replacement	when one element replaces another in a compound or when two elements in different compounds trade places
Resistance	the measurement of how difficult it is for charges to flow through a material
Resonance	An increase in the amplitude of a vibration that occurs when external vibrations match an object's natural frequency.
Responding Variable	the variable that is expected to change because of the manipulated variable
Retina	The layer of cells that lines the inside of the eyeball
Reverberation	When the echos of a sound are heard after the sound source stops producing sound waves.
Rods	Cells in the eye that detect dim light.
Rolling Friction	occurs when an object rolls across a surface
Salt	any ionic compound that can be made from the neutralization of an acid with a base (made from the positive ion of a base and the negative ion of the acid)
Satellite	any object that orbits another object in space
Saturated Solution	a mixture that contains as much dissolved solute as is possible at a given temperature
Science	A way of learning about the natural world by gathering information
Scientific Inquiry	the different ways scientists study the natural world
Scientific Law	a statement that describes what scientists expect to happen every time under a particular set of conditions
Scientific Theory	a well-tested explanation for a wide range of observations or experimental results
Screw	Can be thought of an inclined plane wrapped around a cylinder.
Secondary Color	color obtained by mixing equal parts of two primary colors
Seismic Wave	The waves produced by earthquakes.
Seismograph	This device records the ground movements caused by seismic waves as they move through Earth.
Semiconductors	substances that can conduct electricity under some conditions but not other conditions
Series Circuit	A circuit that contains only one path for current flow.
Short Circuit	a connection that allows current to take an unintended path
Significant Figures	to the digits in a measurement (it is much more than just that, so please go look up how to find significant figures)
Sliding Friction	occurs when two solid surfaces slide over each other
Slope	the steepness of a line on a graph
Solar Wind	a stream of electrically charged particles flowing at high speeds from the sun
Solenoid	A coil of wire with a current that acts as a bar magnet
Solid	has a definite shape and volum
Solubility	a measure of how much solute can dissolve in a solvent at a given temperature
Solute	the substance that is present in a solution in a smaller amount
Solution	a well-mixed mixture containing a solvent and at least one solute that has the same properties throughout
Solution	a well-mixed mixture that contains a solvent and at least one solute
Solvent	the part of a solution present in the largest amount
Sonar	A system that uses reflected sound waves to detect and locate objects underwater. (Sound Navigation and Ranging)
Sonogram	A device that uses reflected ultrasound waves to create a picture.
Specific Heat	The amount of energy required to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram of a material by 1 kelvin.
Speed	the distance an object travels per unit of time
Standing Wave	A wave that appears to stand in one place, even though it is really two waves interfering as they pass through each other.
State	Forms
Static Discharge	the loss of static electricity as electric charges transfer from one object to another
Static Electricity	the buildup of electric charges on an object
Static Friction	the friction that acts on objects that are not moving
Step-down Transformer	a transformer that decreases voltage
Step-up Transformer	a transformer that increases voltage
Sublimation	the change in state from a solid directly to a gas without passing through the liquid state
Subscript	tells you the ratio of elements in the compound
Substance	a single kind of matter that is pure, meaning it always has a specific makeup (composition) and a specific set of properties
Supersaturated Solution	has more dissolved solute than is predicted by its solubility at the given temperature
Surface Tension	the result of an inward pull among the molecules of a liquid that brings the molecules on the surface closer together
Surface Wave	A combination of longitudinal waves and traverse waves that travels along the surface of a medium.
Suspension	a mixture in which particles can be seen and easily separated by settling or filtration
S Wave	Transverse seismic waves.
Synthesis	when two or more elements or compounds combine to make a more complex substance
Telescope	An optical instrument that forms enlarged images of distant objects
Temperature	a measure of the average energy of random motion of particles of matter
Temporary Magnet	A magnet made from a material that easily loses its magnetism.
Terminal	A convenient attachment point used to connect a cell or battery to a circuit.
Terminal Velocity	the greatest velocity a falling object reaches
Termperature	The measure of the average kinetic energy of the individual particles in matter.
Thermal Energy	the total energy of all of the particles in an object
Thermal Energy	The total potential and kinetic energy of particles in an object.
Thermal Expansion	The expanding of matter when it is heated.
Thermogram	An image that shows regions of different temperatures in different colors.
Third Prong	the round prong of a plug that connects any metal pieces in an appliance to the safety grounding wire of a building
Total Internal Reflection	The complete reflection of light by the inside of a medium.
Tracers	radioactive isotopes that can be followed through the steps of a chemical reaction or an industrial process
Transformer	A device that increases or decreases voltage
Transition Metals	the elements in Groups 3 through 12 of the periodic table
Translucent Material	allows some light to pass through it, but scatters the light in many directions
Transparent Material	transmits most of the light that strikes it
Transverse Wave	Waves that move the medium at right angels to the direction in which the waves travel.
Triple bonds	a chemical bond formed when atoms share three pairs of electrons
Trough	The lowest part of a transverse wave.
Tsunami	Earthquakes underwater can produce large surface waves on the ocean.
Tungsten-Halogen Bulb	Incandescent light bulb containing a tungsten filament and a halogen gas.
Turbine	A large circular device made up of many blades
Ultrasound	Sound waves with frequencies above normal human range of hearing.
Ultraviolet Rays	Electromagnetic waves with wavelengths shorter than visible light but longer than X-Rays.
Unbalanced Forces	forces that produce a nonzero net force, which changes an object's motion
Unsaturated Solution	a mixture that contains less dissolved solute than is possible at a given temperature
Valence Electrons	those electrons that have the highest energy level and are held most loosely
Van Allen belts	2 doughnut shaped regions 1,000-25,000 kilometers above Earth that contain electrons and protons traveling at high speeds
Vaporization	the change of state from liquid to gas
Vapor Light	Light jul containing neon or argon gas along with a small amount of solid sodium or mercury.
Variables	factors that can change in an experiment
Vary Inversely	when a graph of two variables forms a curve that slopes downward, it is said to "vary inversely"
Velocity	speed in a given direction
Vibration	A repeated back-and-forth or up-and-down motion.
Virtual Image	An Upright image formed where rays of light appear to meet.
Viscosity	a liquid's resistance to flowing
Visible Light	That portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that can be detected as various colors by the human eye, ranging in wavelength from about 380 nm to about 750 nm.
Voltage	the difference in electrical potential energy between two places in a circuit
Voltage Source	A device that creates an electrical potential energy difference in an electric circuit
Voltmeter	a device used to measure voltage, or electrical potential energy difference
Volume	the amount of space that matter occupies
Wave	A disturbance that transfers energy from place to place.
Wavelength	The distance between two corresponding parts of a wave.
Wedge	A device that is thick at one end and tapers to a thin edge at the other end.
Weight	a measure of the force of gravity on an object
Weight	the force of gravity on a person or object on the surface of a plantet
Wet Cell	an electrochemical cell in which the electrolyte is a liquid
Wheel and Axel	A machine that is made of two circular or cylindrical objects fastened together than rotate about a common axis.
Work	When you exert a force on an object that causes the object to move some distance.
X-Rays	Electromagnetic waves with wavelengths shorter than ultraviolet rays but longer than gamma rays.
science	process used to investigate the world an provide some possible answers to scientific problems.
scientific method	approaches taken to try and solve a problem; recognize a problem, form a hypothesis, test hypothesis, analyze data, draw conclusion.
hypothesis	prediction about a problem that can be tested; based on observations, new information, and personal experience, and often written as an if-and-the statement.
theory	explanation backed by results received from repeated tests or experiments.
law	well-tested description of how something in nature works.
control	standard used for comparison in an experiment.
independent variable	factor that is changed in a controlled experiment.
dependent variable	factor being measured or observed in a controlled experiment.
constant	variable that stays the same in an experiment.
graph	diagram that shows the relationship of one variable to another and that makes it easier to interpret and analyze data.
technology	application of what has been learned through science.
sequence	arrangement of things or events in a certain order.
inference	attempt at an explanation based on observation.
element	substance that cannot be broken down into simpler substances and whose atoms are exactly alike.
electron	tiny, negatively charged particle that is present in all atoms and that has almost no mass.
proton	positively charged, heavy particle contained in the nucleus of all atoms.
neutron	electrically neutral particle that is present in the nucleus  of all atoms; same mass as proton. 
electron cloud	region surrounding the nucleus of an atom, where electrons are more likely to be found.
atomic number	number of protons in the nucleus of an atom of a specific element.
isotope	atoms of the same element that have different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei.
mass number	number of neutrons plus the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom.
radioactive decay	release of nuclear particles and energy from unstable atomic nuclei.
half-life	time needed for one-half the mass of a sample of a radioactive isotope to decay;  can vary from fractions of a second to billions of years.
period	horizontal row of elements in the periodic table whose properties change gradually and predictably.
group	family of elements with similar physical or chemical properties that occupies the same column in the periodic table.
metal	element that is a good conductor of electricity and heat, is usually a solid at room temperature and is shiny, ductile, and malleable.  
nonmetal	element that is a poor conductor of heat and electricity and may be a gas or a brittle solid at room temperature.
metalloid	element that shares some properties with metals and some with nonmetals.
alloy	mixture made of 2 or more elements, one of which is a metal.
semiconductor	element that doesn't conduct electricity as well as a metal but does conduct electricity better than a nonmetal.
electron dot diagram	shows the chemical symbol for an element surrounded by as many dots as there are electrons in its outer energy level. 
chemical bond	force that hold 2 atoms together.
ion	atom that is no longer neutral because it has gained or last an electron.
ionic bond	chemical bond that is created when one atom loses one or more electrons and another atom gains one or more electrons.
compound	pure substance that contains 2 or more elements.
covalent bond	chemical bond that forms between atoms when they share electrons.
molecule	neutral particle that is formed when atoms share electrons.
formula	combination of chemical symbols that tells what elements are in molecules and how many atoms of each element are present.
chemical reaction	energy-requiring process in which chemical changes occur; formation of new substances that have different properties than the original substances.
reactant	substance that exists before a chemical reaction begins; in a chemical equation, the reactant is listed on the left side of the arrow.
product	substance that is formed by a chemical reaction; in a chemical equation, the product is placed on the right side of the arrow.
endothermic reaction	chemical reaction in which energy is absorbed, such as the reaction that breaks water down into hydrogen and oxygen.
exothermic reaction	chemical reaction that releases energy, such as occurs when propane is burned in a gas grill.
rate of reaction	measure of how quickly a chemical reaction occurs, which can be influenced by temperature, particle size, the amount of activation energy that starts the reaction.
inhibitor	substance, such as butyl hydroxy toluene (BHT), that doesn't totally stop a chemical reaction but slows it down.
catalyst	substance, such as an enzyme, that speeds up a chemical reaction but is not used up or permanently changed.
speed	rate of change of an object's position.
displacement	measures the change in position of an object, using the starting point and ending point and noting the direction.
velocity	rate of change of displacement; both speed and direction.
acceleration	rate of change of velocity; act in the direction of motion, at an angle, or opposite to the direction of motion.
mass	quantity of matter in an object and a measure of the object's inertia; 
inertia	measures an object's tendency to remain at rest or to stay in constant motion.
momentum	product of mass and velocity; quantity of motion for an object.
law of conservation of momentum	if not outside forces act on a group of objects, the momentum of the group will not change.
energy	ability to cause change; cannot be destroyed or created, only transferred from one form to another.
kinetic energy	energy an object has due to its motion; depends on the object's mass and velocity.
law of conservation of energy	energy cannot be destroyed or created but it is only transformed from one form to another.
gravitational potential energy	energy an object could potentially gain if it falls, depending on its mass and the height it can fall.
force	push or a pull exerted on an object.
net force	sum of the forces acting on an object.
balanced forces	2 or more forces acting on an object that cancel each other out and do not cause a change in the object's motion.
unbalanced forces	2 or more unequal forces acting on an object that cause the object to accelerate. 
Newton's first law of motion	an object at rest or moving at a constant speed in a straight path continues to do so until a net force acts on it. 
friction	rubbing force that acts against motion between 2 touching surfaces.
Newton's second law of motion	an object acted upon by a net force will accelerate in the direction of this force according to the following equation a-fnet/m where a is the acceleration, fnet is the net force, and m is the mass.
normal force	outward force a surface supplies to support an object.
Newton's third law of motion	forces always act in equal but opposite pairs.
fault	surface along which rocks break and move.
earthquake	vibrations caused by breaking rocks along faults; most result form plates moving over, under, and past each other.
normal fault	break in rock due to tension forces, where rock above the fault surface moves downward in relation to rock below the fault surface.
reverse fault	break in rock due to compression forces, where rocks above the fault surface move upward and over the rocks below the fault surface.
strike-slip fault	break in rock due to shearing forces, where rocks on either side of the fault surface move past each other with little upward or downward movement.
seismic wave	energy waves that are produced at and travel outward from the earthquake focus.
focus	in an earthquake, the point beneath Earth's surface where energy release occurs.
primary wave	wave that travels outward from an earthquake's focus and cause particles in rocks to move back and forth in the same direction the wave is moving.
secondary wave	wave that travels outward from an earthquake's focus and move through Earth by causing particles in rocks to vibrate at right angles to the direction of the wave.
epicenter	point on Earth's surface directly above an earthquake's focus. 
surface waves	waves of energy that reach Earth's surface during an earthquake, travel outward from the epicenter, and move rock particles up and down and side to side.
inner core	very dense, solid center of Earth that is made mostly of iron with smaller amounts of oxygen, silicon, sulfur, or nickel. 
outer core	liquid core that surrounds Earth's solid inner core and that is made mostly of iron.
mantle	largest layer inside Earth, lying directly above the outer core and that is made mostly of silicon, oxygen, magnesium, and iron.
crust	Earth's outermost layer, which varies in thickness from about 5 km to 60 km and is separated from the mantle by the Moho discontinuity.
seismologist	scientist who studies earthquakes and seismic waves.
seismograph	device used by seismologists to record primary, secondary, and surface waves from earthquakes.
magnitude	measure of the energy released by an earthquake.
tsunami	powerful seismic sea wave that can travel thousands of kilometers in all directions and that begins over an earthquake focus.
volcano	opening in Earth's surface that often forms a mountain when layers of lava and volcanic ash erupt an build up; occurs where Earth's plates are moving apart or together and at hot spots.
vent	opening on Earth's surface where magma is forced up and flows out as lava.
crater	steep-walled depression around a volcano's vent.
hot spot	location in the mantle that is hotter than other areas and that melts rock, which is forced up toward the crust as magma.
shield volcano	broad volcano with gently sloping sides formed when hot, fluid lava flows from one or more vents.
tephra	bits of rock or solidified lava dropped from the air during an explosive volcanic eruption.
cinder cone	steep-sided volcano made of loosely packed tephra.
 composite volcano	volcano formed by alternating layers of tephra and lava and that is found mostly where Earth's plates come together.
batholiths	largest intrusive igneous rock bodies that form when magma cools underground before reaching Earth's surface.
dike	intrusive igneous rock body formed when magma is squeezed into a vertical crack that cuts across rock layers and hardens.
sill	intrusive igneous rock body that forms when magma is squeezed into a horizontal crack between rock layers and hardens.
volcanic neck	solid, igneous core of a volcano left behind when a volcano stops erupting and the softer cone erodes away. 
calderas	large openings formed when the top of a volcano collapses.
continental drift	hypothesis proposed by Alfred Wegener that states that continents have moved slowly to their current location on Earth.
Pangaea	single large land-mass made up of all the continents connected together that broke apart about 200 million years ago.
seafloor spreading	magma from below Earth's crust is force upward toward the surface at a midocean ridge, flows from the cracks as the seafloor spreads apart and becomes solid as it cools, forming new seafloor.
plate tectonics	Earth's crust and upper mantle are broken into sections that move around on a plasticlike layer of the mantle.
plate	section of Earth's lithosphere that is composed of oceanic crust, continental crust, and rigid upper mantle and that moves around on a plasticlike layer of the mantle.
lithosphere	rigid, outer-most layer of Earth that is about 100 km thick, and is composed of the crust and part of the upper mantle.
asthenosphere	plasticlike layer below the lithosphere.
convection current	cycle of heating, rising, cooling, and sinking that is thought to be the force behind plate tectonics.
fossil	remains or traces of once-living organism preserved in rock.
petrified remains	fossils that form when some or all of the original materials that made up the organisms are replaced with minerals.
carbonaceous film	fossil formed when the remains of a once-living organism are subjected to heat and pressure, leaving only a thin film of carbon behind.
mold	fossil formed when an organism is buried, decays and leaves behind a hollow place in the rock.
cast	fossil formed when sediments fill a mold and harden into rock.
index fossil	fossils of species that existed on Earth for only a short time, were abundant, and were widespread geographically; used by scientists to determine the age of rock layers.
principle of superposition	undisturbed layers of rocks, older rocks lie underneath younger and younger rocks.
relative dating	method to determine the order of events and relative age of the rocks by examining the position of rocks in a sequence.
unconformity	gap in the rock layers due to erosion, nondeposition, or both.
absolute dating	process that uses the properties of atoms in rocks and other objects to determine their exact ages, in years.
radioactive decay	release of nuclear particles and energy from unstable atomic nuclei.
half-life	time needed for one-half the mass of a sample of a radioactive isotope to decay; varies from fractions of a second to billions of years.
radiometric dating	process to determine the absolute ages of rocks by measuring the amounts of parent and daughter materials in a rock and by knowing the half-life of the parent.
uniformitarianism	Earth processes happening today are similar to those that happened in the past.
species	group of similar organisms that can successfully reproduce among themselves in their natural environment.
evolution	changes in the inherited features of a species over time; can occur slowly (gradualism) or rapidly (punctuated equilibrium).
natural selection	Darwin's theory of evolution that  organisms with traits best suited to their environments are more likely to survive and reproduce.
variation	an inherited trait that makes an individual different from other members of the same species; can be beneficial, harmful, or neutral in a population.
gradualism	model of evolution that shows a slow change of some species to another, new species through continued mutations and variations over time.
punctuated equilibrium	model of evolution that shows the rapid change of a species caused by the mutation of just a few genes, resulting in the appearance of a new species.
sedimentary rock	rock formed by compaction and cementation of sediments or when minerals precipitate out of solutions or are left behind when a solution evaporates; rock type formed from particles of preexisting rocks contains the most fossils.
radioactive element	element that gives off radiation due to an unstable nucleus.
homologous	body structures that are similar in origin and show that 2 or more species may share common ancestors.
vestigial structure	body structure with no obvious use, which may once have functioned in an ancestor.
embryology	study of development in organisms.
primates	group of mammals that includes monkeys, apes, and humans, and that shares several characteristics, such as opposable thumbs and binocular vision.
hominids	humanlike primates that walked upright on 2 feet and ate both meat and vegetables.
Homo sapiens	 human species thought to have evolved about 400,000 years ago.
geologic time scale	record of events in Earth's history based on major evolutionary changes and geologic events; major subdivisions are eras, periods, and epochs.
era	major subdivision of the geologic time scale based on differences n life-forms.
period	next-smaller division of the geologic time scale after the era.
epoch	division of geologic time smaller than a period.
trilobite	organism that lived hundreds of millions of years ago and is considered an index fossil of the Paleozoic era.
Precambrian time	longest geologic time 
cyanobacteria	one of the earliest life-forms on Earth; evolved during Precambrian time.
Paleozoic era	geologic era marked by the first appearance of life-forms with hard parts.
amphibian	animals that live on land and breathe air but return to water to reproduce.
reptile	egg-laying, scaly-skinned animals that do not need to return to water to reproduce and probably evolved from the same ancestor as amphibians.
Mesozoic era	geologic era in which Pangaea broke up, the present-day continents were formed, and whose dominant land life-forms were reptiles and gymnosperms.
gastrolith	stones swallowed by dinosaurs and by modern birds to help with digestion. 
Cenozoic era	geologic era in which we live; began with the extinction of dinosaurs and many other life-forms.
organic compound	compound that contains carbon.
hydrocarbon	compound that contains only carbon and hydrogen atoms--for example methane, CH4, and ethane, C2H6.
saturated hydrocarbon	hydrocarbon with only single bonds--for example propane, C3H8, and butane, C4H10.
unsaturated hydrocarbon	hydrocarbon that has one or more double or triple bonds--for example ethylene, C2H4, and propylene, C3H6
isomer	compound with the same chemical formula but different structures and different chemical and physical properties.
hydroxyl group	consists of one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom joined together by a covalent bond; formula is -OH; when substituted for hydrogen in a hydrocarbon, forms an alcohol.
carboxyl group	consists of one carbon atom, 2 oxygen atoms, and one hydrogen atom; formula is -COOH; when substituted for hydrogen in a hydrocarbon, forms a carboxylic acid.
amino group	consists of a nitrogen atom joined by covalent bonds to 2 hydrogen atoms; formula is -NH2; when substituted for hydrogen in a hydrocarbon, forms an amine.
amino acid	building block of proteins; contains both an amino group and a carboxyl group substituted on the same carbon atom.
polymer	large natural or synthetic molecule made of many small organic molecules that link together to form a long chain.
protein	polymer made of individual amino acids linked together in a chain; catalyzes many cell reactions and provides the structural material for many parts of the body.
carbohydrate	energy-supplying organic compounds that are broken down into simple sugars in the body; contain only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
lipid	energy-supplying and energy-storing organic compounds composed of  3 long-chain carboxylic acids bonded to glycerol; commonly called fats and oils and can be saturated or unsaturated.
stomata	openings on leaf surfaces o leaflike structures through which gases like carbon dioxide and water vapor may enter and leave a plant.
transpiration	loss of water vapor through the stomata of a leaf.
photosynthesis	food-making process that takes place in the chloroplasts of plant cells, where carbon dioxide from the air, water in the soil, and light energy react to form glucose and oxygen.
respiration	series of chemical reactions by which all living cells break down food to release energy.
tropism	response of a plant to an outside stimulus such as gravity or light.
auxin	type of plant hormone that can cause plants to show positive phototropism.
photoperiodism	response of a plant to the number of hours of daylight and darkness it receives each day.
long-day plant	plant that needs less than 10-12 hours of darkness to begin the flowering process.
short-day plant	plant that needs 12 or more hours of darkness to begin the flowering process.
day-neutral plant	plant that does not have a specific photoperiod and whose flowering process can begin over a wide range of hours of darkness.
gametophytes stage	plant life cycle stage in which all plant structures are made of cells with a haploid number (n) of chromosomes.
sporophyte stage	plant life cycle stage in which all plant structures are made of cells with a diploid number (2n) of chromosomes.
alternation of generations	occurs when a plant's life cycle alternates between a sex-cell-producing stage and a spore-producing stage.
frond	leaf of a fern that grows from a rhizome.
rhizome	underground stem of a fern, from which fronds and roots grow.
sori	spore-producing structures on the undersides of fern fronds.
prothallus	fern gametophyte, which can make its own food, absorb water and nutrients, and has both male and female reproductive structures.
ovule	in a seed plant, the structure that contains an egg cell, food0storage tissue, and a sticky fluid.
pollen grain	produced by the male reproductive organs of seed plants; 2 sperm develop in each pollen grain.
stamen	male reproductive organ inside the flower of an angiosperm; consists of a filament and an anther.
pistil	female reproductive organ inside the flower of an angiosperm; consists of a stick stigma, a style, and an ovary.
ovary	in angiosperms, the swollen base of the pistil where ovules are formed.
pollination	transfer of pollen grains from the stamen to the stigma.
biosphere	part of Earth that supports organisms, is the highest level of biological organization, and is made up of all Earth's ecosystem.
ecology	study of the interactions that take place among organisms and between organisms and the physical features of the environment.
abiotic factor	all the nonliving, physical features of the environment, including light, soil, water, and temperature, that help determine which species can survive in an area.
biotic factor	living or once-living organisms in the environment.
population	all the individuals of one species that live in the same area at the same time and compete with each other for food, water, mates, and space.
community	consists of groups of populations that interact with each other in a given area and depend on each other for food, shelter, and for other needs.
ecosystem	consists of a biotic community and the abiotic factors that affect it.
population density	size of a population that occupies an area of limited size.
limiting factor	any biotic or abiotic factor that restricts the number of individuals in a population.
carrying capacity	largest number of individuals an environment can support and maintain over a long period of time.
symbiosis	any close relationship between 2 or more different species.
habitat	physical location where an organism lives.
niche	role of an organism in the ecosystem, including what it eats, how it interacts with other organisms, and hot it gets food.
food chain	model that describes the feeding relationships in a community, usually has 3 or 4 links, and shows how energy in the form of food passes from one organism to another.
food web	model used to describe a series of overlapping food chains and that shows the many organisms that feed on more than one level in an ecosystem. 
ecological pyramid	model used to describe the transfer of energy from the producers of an ecosystem through successive levels of organisms in the food chain.
water cycle	constant journey of water molecules on Earth as they rise into the atmosphere, fall to land or the ocean as rain, or snow, and flow into rivers and oceans through the processes of evaporation, condensation, and precipitation.
nitrogen cycle	transfer of nitrogen from the atmosphere to plants and back to the atmosphere or directly into plants again.
ecological succession	process of gradual change from one community of organisms to another.   
primary succession	ecological succession that begins in a place that does not have soil.
pioneer community	first community of organisms to move into a new environment. 
secondary succession	ecological succession that begins in a place that already has soil and was once the home of living organisms.
climax community	community that has reached the final stage of ecological succession.
biome	large geographic areas with similar climates and ecosystems; 6 most common are tundra, taiga, temperate forest, tropical rain forest, grassland, and desert.
tundra	cold, dry ,treeless biome located at latitudes surrounding the north pole and that has winters 6 to 9 months long.
taiga	cold region of cone-bearing evergreen trees that lies just below the tundra and is the world's largest terrestrial biome.
temperate deciduous forest	biome that lies at latitudes below about 50 degrees in both the northern and southern hemispheres, usually has 4 distinct seasons, and supports a wide variety of plants and animals.
tropical rain forest	hot, wet, equatorial biome that contains the largest number of species.
grassland	temperate and tropical regions that receive between 25 cm and 75 cm of precipitation each year ad are dominated by climax communities of grasses.
desert	driest biome on Earth; receives less than 25 cm of rain each year and supports little plant life.
plankton	microscopic algae, plants and other organisms that float in warm, sunlit waters near the surface of freshwater lakes and ponds.
estuary	area where a river meets the ocean that contains a mixture of freshwater and salt water and serves as nursery for many species of ocean fish. 
intertidal zone	portion of the shoreline that is covered with water at high tide and exposed to the air at low tide.
natural resource	material found in nature that is useful or necessary for living organisms.
renewable resource	natural resource, such as water, that is recycled or replaced by ongoing natural processes.
nonrenewable resource	natural resource, such as petroleum, that is available in limited amounts and cannot be replace or is only replaced slowly.
fossil fuel	nonrenewable energy source, such as natural gas, that formed from the bodies of organisms that died hundreds of millions of years ago.
photovoltaic (PV) cell	device made of silicon that turns sunlight directly into electric current.
hydroelectric power	electricity produced by the energy of flowing water.
geothermal energy	heat energy from below the surface of Earth.
nuclear energy	energy produced when the nuclei of uranium atoms split apart in a nuclear fission reaction.
soil depletion	removal of soil nutrients from land used for agriculture due to the replacement of native plants with crops that do not decay and replenish the soil.  
erosion	wearing away of soil by wind and water.
soil management	use of plowing methods to prevent or reduce soil depletion and erosion.
extinction	dying out of an entire species either naturally or through the actions of humans.
endangered species	species that is in danger of becoming extinct unless action is taken to protect it.
 recycling	process that reduces the use of natural resources by reusing an item after it has been changed or reprocessed.
pollutant	any substance that contaminates the environment and causes pollution.
smog	air pollution that forms when sunlight reacts with pollutant chemicals produced by burning fossil fuels.
acid rain	rain or snow with a pH below 5.
6; results from the mixture of water vapor and air pollutants in the atmosphere.
ozone depletion	thinning of Earth's protective ozone layer, primarily from chlorofluorocarbons reacting with and destroying ozone molecules.
greenhouse effect	warming of Earth due to a blanket of gases in the atmosphere that prevents heat from radiating back into space.
global warming	increase in the average yearly temperature of Earth.
hazardous waste	waste materials, such as pesticides and nuclear waste, that are harmful to human health or poisonous to living organisms and that must be properly disposed of.
groundwater	water contained in the soil or trapped in underground pockets formed by nonporous rock; comes from rainfall and runoff that soaks through the soil.
electromagnetic spectrum	arrangement of electromagnetic radiation according to wavelength.
refracting telescope	optical telescope that uses a double convex lens to focus light and form an image at the focal point.
reflecting telescope	optical telescope that uses a mirror to focus light an produce an image at the focal point.
observatory	specially designed building, often with a dome-shaped roof that opens up to admit light; used to house optical telescopes.
radio telescope	type of telescope that uses a large, curved dish to collect and record radio waves traveling through space and that can be used during the day or at night and during bad weather.
satellite	any object that revolves around another object; can be natural (Earth's moon) or artificial.
orbit	curved path of a satellite as it revolves around an abject in space.
space probe	instrument that travels out into the solar system to gather information and sends the data back to Earth.
Project Mercury	1st step in the US effort to reach the moon, in which a piloted spacecraft successfully orbited around Earth and returned safely.
Project Gemini	2nd stage in the US program to reach the moon, in which a team of astronauts met and connected with another spacecraft while in orbit.
Project Apollo	final stage in the US effort to reach the moon--on July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong was the 1st human to set foot on the lunar surface.
space shuttle	reusable spacecraft that carries astronauts, satellites, and other materials to and from space.
space station	large artificial satellite that provides support systems, living quarters, and equipment so that humans can live and work in space and conduct research not possible on Earth.
sphere	round, 3-dimensional object whose surface at all points is the same distance from its center.
axis	imaginary line around which Earth spins.
rotation	spinning of Earth on its axis, which causes day and night to occur.
revolution	yearly orbit of Earth around the sun.
ellipse	elongated, closed curve that describes Earth's orbit.
equinox	twice-yearly time when the sun is directly above Earth's equator and the number of nighttime hours equals the number of daylight hours worldwide.
solstice	point at which the sun reaches its greatest distance north or south of the equator.
moon phase	changing appearance of the moon as seen from earth, which depends on the relative positions of the moon, Earth, and sun.
new moon	moon phase that occurs when the lighted half of the moon faces the sun and the dark side faces Earth.
waxing	occurs shortly after a new moon, when more and more of the moon's lighted side becomes visible.
first quarter	moon phase in which one-quarter of the moon's surface that faces Earth is lit up; occurs about a week after a new moon.
full moon	moon phase in which all of the moon's surface that faces Earth is lit up.
waning	occurs after a full moon, when the amount of the moon's lighted side that can be seen becomes smaller.
third quarter	moon phase in which only half of the lighted side of the moon is visible.
solar eclipse	eclipse that occurs when the moon moves directly between the sun and Earth and casts a shadow on part of Earth.
lunar eclipse	eclipse that occurs when Earth's shadow falls on the moon.
maria	dark-colored, relatively flat areas of the moon that were formed when ancient lava filled basins on the moon's surface.
mascon	concentration of mass on the moon located beneath an impact basin.
solar system	system of 9 planets that orbit the sun; objects that orbit the sun.
inner planet	4 solid, rocky planets that are closest to the sun--Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars.
outer planet	5 planets that are the farthest away from the sun--Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
Mercury	planet closest to the sun; has many craters, low gravitational pull, and is the 2nd smallest planet in our solar system.
Venus	2nd planet from the sun; has a dense atmosphere of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid.
Earth	3rd planet from the sun; surface temperatures allow water to exist as a solid, liquid, and gas and atmosphere protects life from the sun's radiation.
Mars	4th planet from the sun; appears red due to the iron oxide content in its weathered rocks.
astronomical unit	average distance from Earth to the sun (150 million km), which is used to measure distances to objects in the solar system.
Jupiter	 largest planet and 5th planet from the sun; composed mostly of hydrogen and helium; has continuous storms of high-pressure gas.
Uranus	large, gaseous planet and 7th planet from the sun; has a magnetic pole tilted 60 degrees and rotates on an axis nearly parallel to the plane of its orbit.
Neptune	large, gaseous planet similar to Uranus; usually the 8th planet form the sun.
Pluto	smallest planet and considered the 9th planet from the sun; has a thin, changing atmosphere and icy-rock surface.    
Saturn	6th planet from the sun; has a complex ring system made of hundreds of ringlets.
Great Red Spot	high-pressure storm generated by huge thunderstorms in Jupiter's atmosphere.
comet	mass of dust and rock particles mixed in with frozen water, ammonia, and methane; consists of a nucleus, a coma, and a tail.
Oort Cloud	cloud of comets that completely surrounds the solar system and that is located beyond the orbit of Pluto.
meteor	meteoroid that burns up in Earth's atmosphere.
meteorite	meteoroid that does not completely burn up in Earth's atmosphere and strikes Earth.
asteroid	piece of rock usually found in the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
constellation	group of stars that forms a pattern that looks like a familiar object, animal, or character.   
absolute magnitude	measure of the amount of light a star actually emits.
apparent magnitude	measure of the amount of light that is received on Earth from a star.
parallax	apparent shift in position of an object when it is viewed from 2 different positions.
light-year	distance that light travels in one year (9.
5 trillion km), which is used to measure distances in space.
photosphere	lowest layer of the sun's atmosphere and the layer that gives off light.
chromospheres	layer of the sun's atmosphere above the photosphere and below the corona.
corona	largest layer of the sun's atmosphere that extends millions of miles into space.
sunspot	dark, relatively cool areas on the surface of the sun.
binary system	system in which 2 stars orbit each other.
main sequence	in an H-R diagram, the diagonal band of stars that runs from hot, bright stars in the upper-left corner of the diagram to cool, faint stars in the lower-right corner.
nebula	large cloud of gas and dust that can fragment into smaller pieces, each of which will collapse and form stars.
giant	stage in a star's life cycle where hydrogen in the cores is used up, the core contracts, and temperatures inside the star increase, causing the outer layers of the star to expand.
white dwarf	late stage in a star's life cycle where its core uses up its supply of helium, it contracts, and its outer layers escape into space, leaving behind the hot dense core.
supergiant	late stage in the life cycle of a massive star where the core reaches very high temperatures, heavy elements form by fusion, and the star expands.
neutron star	collapsed core of a supernova that shrinks to about 10km to 15 km in diameter and has only neutrons in the dense core.
black hole	remnant of a star that is so dense that nothing can escape its gravity.
galaxy	large group of stars, gas, and dust held together by gravity.
big bang theory	approximately 15 billion years ago, the universe began expanding out of an enormous explosion.
asexual reproduction	reproduction without the fusion of gametes
asteroid	a small celestial body composed of rock and metal
atmosphere	the envelope of gases surrounding any celestial body
atmospheric pressure	the pressure exerted by the atmosphere
atom	the smallest component of an element
bias	a partiality preventing objective consideration of an issue
bulletin board system	a computer that is running software that allows users to leave messages and access information of general interest
capacity	capability to perform or produce
CD-ROM	a compact disk that is used with a computer
celestial body	natural objects visible in the sky
cell	the basic structural and functional unit of all organisms
cell division	the process in reproduction and growth by which a cell divides to form daughter cells
central processing unit	the part of a computer that does most of the data processing
chemical change	process determined by substances' composition and structure
chemical compound	(chemistry) a substance formed by chemical union of two or more elements or ingredients in definite proportion by weight
chemical element	any of the more than 100 known substances (of which 92 occur naturally) that cannot be separated into simpler substances and that singly or in combination constitute all matter
chemical energy	that part of the energy in a substance that can be released by a chemical reaction
chemical reaction	a process in which substances are changed into others
circulatory system	the organs and tissues involved in circulating blood and lymph through the body
climate	the weather in some location averaged over a period of time
climate change	a change in the world's climate
comet	(astronomy) a relatively small extraterrestrial body consisting of a frozen mass that travels around the sun in a highly elliptical orbit
conservation of energy	the fundamental principle of physics that the total energy of an isolated system is constant despite internal changes
crystal	a solid having a highly regular atomic structure
data processing	(computer science) a series of operations on data by a computer in order to retrieve or transform or classify information
debris	the remains of something that has been destroyed
deceleration	a decrease in rate of change
decoder	the kind of intellectual who converts messages from a code to plain text
digestive system	the system that makes food absorbable into the body
disassembly	the act of taking something apart (as a piece of machinery)
eclipse	one celestial body obscures another
ecosystem	organisms interacting with their physical environment
egg cell	the female reproductive cell; the female gamete
electric current	a flow of electricity through a conductor
electrical energy	energy made available by the flow of electric charge through a conductor
feedback	the process in which output of a system is returned to input
format	the general appearance of a publication
formatting	the organization of information according to preset specifications (usually for computer processing)
function	what something is used for
fungus	an organism of the kingdom Fungi lacking chlorophyll and feeding on organic matter; ranging from unicellular or multicellular organisms to spore-bearing syncytia
galaxy	a collection of star systems
Galileo	Italian astronomer and mathematician who was the first to use a telescope to study the stars; demonstrated that different weights descend at the same rate; perfected the refracting telescope that enabled him to make many discoveries (1564-1642)
gene	part of DNA controlling physical characteristics and growth
gravitational force	the force of attraction between all masses in the universe
heat energy	a form of energy that is transferred by a difference in temperature
homeostasis	metabolic equilibrium maintained by biological mechanisms
host	a person who invites guests to a social event
hydrosphere	the watery layer of the earth's surface
hypothesis	a tentative insight into the natural world
icon	a visual representation produced on a surface
igneous rock	rock formed by the solidification of molten magma
immune system	a system (including the thymus and bone marrow and lymphoid tissues) that protects the body from foreign substances and pathogenic organisms by producing the immune response
inertia	the tendency of something to stay in rest or motion
infection	the invasion of the body by pathogenic microorganisms
infrared radiation	electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths longer than visible light but shorter than radio waves
input device	a device that can be used to insert data into a computer or other computational device
insulator	a material with little electrical or thermal conductivity
intranet	a restricted computer network
invertebrate	any animal lacking a backbone or notochord
kinetic energy	the mechanical energy that a body has by virtue of motion
light year	the distance that light travels in a vacuum in 1 year
lithosphere	the part of the Earth consisting of the crust and mantle
logic	the branch of philosophy that analyzes inference
Louis Pasteur	French chemist and biologist whose discovery that fermentation is caused by microorganisms resulted in the process of pasteurization (1822-1895)
malfunction	fail to work properly
mantle	a sleeveless garment like a cloak but shorter
Marie Curie	French chemist who won two Nobel prizes
mechanical energy	energy in a mechanical form
metamorphic rock	rock altered by pressure and heat
meteor	small extraterrestrial body that hits the earth's atmosphere
mismatched	either not matched or unsuitably matched
molecule	the simplest structural unit of an element or compound
mutualism	the relation between two organisms that benefit each other
navigation	the guidance of ships or airplanes from place to place
nervous system	the sensory and control apparatus consisting of a network of nerve cells
network	an open fabric woven together at regular intervals
nuclear reaction	(physics) a process that alters the energy or structure or composition of atomic nuclei
organ	a structure in an animal specialized for some function
output	production of a certain amount
output device	electronic or electromechanical equipment connected to a computer and used to transfer data out of the computer in the form of text, images, sounds, or other media
oxidation	the process by which a substance combines with oxygen
oxygen	a colorless, odorless gas that is essential for respiration
parasite	an animal or plant that lives in or on a host
peer review	evaluate professionally a colleague's work
percolation	the slow passage of a liquid through a filtering medium
photosynthesis	synthesis of compounds in plants aided by radiant energy
Pierre Curie	French physicist; husband of Marie Curie (1859-1906)
plant tissue	the tissue of a plant
predation	the act of preying by a predator who kills and eats the prey
prey	animal hunted or caught for food
programming language	a language designed for programming computers
pulley	a wheel with a groove in which a rope can run
radiation	the act of spreading outward from a central source
reproductive system	organs and tissues involved in the production and maturation of gametes and in their union and subsequent development as offspring
respiration	a single complete act of breathing in and out
respiratory system	the system for taking in oxygen and giving off carbon dioxide; in terrestrial animals this is accomplished by breathing
rusting	the formation of reddish-brown ferric oxides on iron by low-temperature oxidation in the presence of water
satellite	any celestial body orbiting around a planet or star
scientific method	method of observation to test scientific hypotheses
screening	the display of a motion picture
sedimentary rock	rock formed from consolidated clay sediments
sedimentation	the phenomenon of sediment or gravel accumulating
sexual reproduction	reproduction involving the union or fusion of a male and a female gamete
skeletal system	the hard structure (bones and cartilages) that provides a frame for the body of an animal
soil erosion	the washing away of soil by the flow of water
species	taxonomic group whose members can interbreed
speed	a rate at which something happens
sperm	the male reproductive cell; the male gamete
sperm cell	the male reproductive cell; the male gamete
spreadsheet	a screen-oriented interactive program enabling a user to lay out financial data on the screen
tape drive	a mechanism that transports magnetic tape across the read/write heads of a tape playback/recorder
taxonomy	a classification of organisms based on similarities
tissue	part of an organism consisting of an aggregate of cells
touch screen	a computer display that enables the user to interact with the computer by touching areas on the screen
universal solvent	hypothetical universal solvent once sought by alchemists
URL	the address of a web page on the world wide web
vertebrate	animals having a bony or cartilaginous skeleton
visible light	(physics) electromagnetic radiation that can produce a visual sensation
aa	a type of lava that has a jagged surface covered with rough volcanic fragments
abdomen	the distinct, usually elongated posterior region of an arthropod's body
abdominal cavity	the hollow part of the body that is between the thorax and the pelvis; contains organs of digestion, excretion, and reproduction
abiotic	describes the nonliving part of the environment, including water, rocks, light, and temperature
abiotic factor	an environmental factor that is not associated with the activities of living organisms
ABO blood group system	a system used to classify human blood by antigens found on the surface of red blood cells
aboral surface	a surface that is opposite or away from the mouth
abrasion	the grinding and wearing away of rock surfaces through the mechanical action of other rock or sand particles
abscisic acid	a hormone in plants that helps regulate the growth of buds and the germination of seeds (abbreviation, ABA)
abscission	the separation of leaves or other plant structures by the formation of a layer of cells that develops on the base of the plant structure when the structure is ready to fall
absolute age	the numeric age of an object or event, often stated in years before the present, as established by an absolute-dating process, such as radiometric dating
absolute dating	any method that measures the age of an object or event in years rather than measuring the age relative to another object or event; one such method is radiometric dating
absolute humidity	the mass of water vapor per unit volume of air that contains the water vapor; usually expressed as grams of water vapor per cubic meter of air
absolute magnitude	the brightness that a star would have at a distance of 32.6 light-years from Earth
absolute zero	the temperature at which molecular energy is at a minimum (0 K on the Kelvin scale or –273.16ºC on the Celsius scale)
absorption	in digestion, the process by which the end products of digestion are absorbed by the organism's fluids and cells
absorption	in optics, the transfer of light energy to particles of matter
absorption spectrum	a diagram or graph that indicates the wavelengths of radiant energy that a substance absorbs
abyssal plain	a large, flat, almost level area of the deep-ocean basin
abyssal zone	the benthic environment that extends from beneath the bathyal zone to a depth of up to 6,000 m
acanthodian	an early fish; the earliest known vertebrate to have jaws
acceleration	the rate at which velocity changes over time; an object accelerates if its speed, direction, or both change
accessory pigment	a pigment that absorbs light energy and transfers it to chlorophyll in photosynthesis
acclimation	an organism's change in response to a change in the organism's environment
accuracy	a description of how close a measurement is to the true value of the quantity measured
acetyl-CoA	acetyl coenzyme A, a compound that is synthesized by cells and that plays a major role in metabolism
acid	any compound that increases the number of hydronium ions when dissolved in water; acids turn blue litmus paper red and react with bases and some metals to form salts
acid-base indicator	a substance that changes in color depending on the pH of the solution that the substance is in
acid-ionization constant	the term Ka
acid precipitation	precipitation, such as rain, sleet, or snow, that contains a high concentration of acids, often because of the pollution of the atmosphere
acid rain	precipitation that has a pH below normal and has an unusually high concentration of sulfuric or nitric acids, often as a result of chemical pollution of the air from sources such as automobile exhausts and the burning of fossil fuels
acid shock	the sudden runoff of large amounts of highly acidic water into lakes and streams when snow melts in the spring or when heavy rains follow a drought
acne	an inflammatory disorder of the sebaceous glands that is characterized by skin lesions in the form of pimples, blackheads, and sometimes cysts
acoelomate	an animal that lacks a coelom, or body cavity
acquired trait	a change in an individual organism's structure or function that occurs during the lifetime of the organism, caused by injury, disease, or environmental factors, and that is not inherited by future generations
ACTH	adrenocorticotropic hormone, a hormone that stimulates the adrenal cortex
actin	a protein responsible for the contraction and relaxation of muscle
actinide	any of the elements of the actinide series, which have atomic numbers from 89 (actinium, Ac) through 103 (lawrencium, Lr)
actinomycete	a member of a class of bacteria that form branched filaments and that can be found in soil, in water, or as pathogens in animals and plants
action potential	a sudden change in the polarity of the membrane of a neuron, gland cell, or muscle fiber that facilitates the transmission of electrical impulses
activated complex	a molecule in an unstable state intermediate to the reactants and the products in the chemical reaction
activation	in genetics, the initiation of transcription of a particular gene
activation energy	the minimum amount of energy required to start a chemical reaction
active site	the site on an enzyme that attaches to a substrate
active solar heating	the gathering of solar energy by collectors that are used to heat water or heat a building
active transport	the movement of chemical substances, usually across the cell membrane, against a concentration gradient; requires cells to use energy
activity series	a series of elements that have similar properties and that are arranged in descending order of chemical activity; examples of activity series include metals and halogens
actual yield	the measured amount of a product of a reaction
acyclovir	an antiviral drug
adapt	in populations, to change genetically over generations in response to the natural environment such that the population has an increased ability to survive and reproduce
adaptation	the process of becoming adapted to an environment; an anatomical, physiological, or behavioral change that improves a population's ability to survive
adaptive radiation	an evolutionary pattern in which many species evolve from a single ancestral species
addiction	a physiological or psychological dependence on a substance, such as alcohol or drugs
addition polymer	a polymer in which the formula of the repeating structural unit is identical to the molecular formula of the monomer
addition reaction	a reaction in which an atom or molecule is added to an unsaturated molecule
adductor muscle	the thick muscle that joins the two valves in mollusks and that causes the shell to open
adenine	one of the four bases that combine with sugar and phosphate to form a nucleotide subunit of DNA; adenine pairs with thymine
ADH	antidiuretic hormone, a hormone that regulates the resorption of water from the kidney
adhesion	the attractive force between two bodies of different substances that are in contact with each other
adiabatic	the process that occurs when an air mass rises and expands without exchanging heat with its surroundings
adiabatic cooling	the process by which the temperature of an air mass decreases as the air mass rises and expands
adiabatic process	a thermodynamic process in which no heat transfer between the system and its environment takes place
ADP	adenosine diphosphate, an organic molecule that is involved in energy metabolism; composed of a nitrogenous base, a sugar, and two phosphate groups
adrenal gland	one of the two endocrine glands located above each kidney
advection fog	condensation of water vapor that results from the cooling of warm, moist air as the air moves across a cold surface
advective cooling	the process by which the temperature of an air mass decreases as the air mass moves over a cold surface
adventitious root	a root that occurs in an unusual position, such as on stems or leaves
aerial photograph	a photograph of the Earth's surface that is taken from the air
aerobic	describes a process that requires oxygen
aerobic exercise	physical exercise intended to increase the activity of the heart and lungs to promote the body's use of oxygen
afferent neuron	a neuron that conducts impulses toward the central nervous system
aflatoxin	a toxic fungal poison that causes liver cancer; found as contaminants in peanuts and corn; produced by a species of Aspergillus
afterbirth	the remains of the placenta and the membranes, which are expelled from the mother's body following birth
aftershock	an earthquake that follows the main shock of a large earthquake
agar	a gel-like base for culturing microbes; extracted from certain red algae
Agent Orange	a toxic substance used to cause plants to lose their leaves
age structure	the classification of members of a population into groups according to age or the distribution of members of a population in terms of age groups
aggregation	a grouping of cells or other organisms
agnathan	a member of a class of primitive, jawless fishes
agricultural revolution	the change from a hunting and gathering society to an agricultural society that began about 10,000 years ago
agriculture	the raising of crops and livestock for food or for other products that are useful to humans
AIDS	acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a disease caused by HIV, an infection that results in an ineffective immune system
air mass	a large body of air throughout which temperature and moisture content are similar
air pollution	the contamination of the atmosphere by the introduction of pollutants from human and natural sources
air pressure	the measure of the force with which air molecules push on a surface
albedo	the fraction of solar radiation that is reflected off the surface of an object
albumen	the white of an egg, composed primarily of the protein albumin
alcohol	an organic compound that contains one or more hydroxyl groups attached to carbon atoms
alcoholic fermentation	the anaerobic process by which yeasts and other microorganisms break down sugars to form carbon dioxide and ethanol
alcoholic hepatitis	liver inflammation resulting from alcoholism
alcoholism	a chronic disorder in which a person repeatedly drinks alcoholic beverages in an amount that interferes with the person's health and activities; the term implies a certain degree of addiction or dependence
aldehyde	an organic compound that contains the carbonyl group, —CHO
aldosterone	a hormone that helps maintain water and salt balance
algae	eukaryotic organisms that convert the sun’s energy into food through photosynthesis but that do not have roots, stems, or leaves (singular, alga)
alginate	a salt of alginic acid
alkali metal	one of the elements of Group 1 of the periodic table (lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium)
alkaline	a solution that has a pH greater than 7 because of the dissociation of a base in water to produce hydroxide ions
alkaline-earth metal	one of the elements of Group 2 of the periodic table (beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium)
alkane	a hydrocarbon characterized by a straight or branched carbon chain that contains only single bonds
alkene	a hydrocarbon that contains one or more double bonds
alkyl group	a group of atoms that forms when one hydrogen atom is removed from an alkane molecule
alkyl halide	a compound formed from an alkyl group and a halogen (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, or iodine)
alkyne	a hydrocarbon that contains one or more triple bonds
allantois	a membranous sac that acts as an organ of respiration and nutrition for the embryo; in humans, its blood vessels become the blood vessels of the umbilical cord
allele	one of the alternative forms of a gene that governs a characteristic, such as hair color
allele frequency	the proportion of gene copies in a population that are a given allele, expressed as a percentage
allergy	a physical response to an antigen, which can be a common substance that produces little or no response in the general population
alloy	a solid or liquid mixture of two or more metals
alluvial fan	a fan-shaped mass of rock material deposited by a stream when the slope of the land decreases sharply; for example, alluvial fans form when streams flow from mountains to flat land
alluvium	rock and soil carried and deposited by streams
alpha decay	the release of an alpha particle from a nucleus
alpha particle	a positively charged atom that is released in the disintegration of radioactive elements and that consists of two protons and two neutrons
alpine glacier	a narrow, wedge-shaped mass of ice that forms in a mountainous region and that is confined to a small area by surrounding topography; examples include valley glaciers, cirque glaciers, and piedmont glaciers
alternating current	an electric current that changes direction at regular intervals (abbreviation, AC)
alternation of generations	the alternation of sexual reproduction and asexual reproduction in certain plants and animals
alternative energy	energy that does not come from fossil fuels and that is still in development
altitude	in astronomy, the angle between an object in the sky and the horizon
altitude	the height of an object above a reference point, such as sea level or the Earth's surface
altricial	describes organisms that are not very developed when born and that require care or nursing
altruistic behavior	self-sacrificing behavior that benefits another individual
alveolus	any of the tiny air cells of the lungs where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged
amber	a hardened tree resin (a thick, saplike substance) in which fossils may be trapped and preserved
amine	an organic compound that can be considered to be a derivative of ammonia
amino acid	any one of 20 different organic molecules that contain a carboxyl and an amino group and that combine to form proteins
amino acid–based hormone	a hormone that is made up of simple amino acids, peptides, or proteins
ammonia	a colorless gas that has an alkaline reaction in water; forms in nature as an end product of animal metabolism (formula, NH3)
ammonification	the formation of ammonia compounds in the soil by the action of bacteria on decaying matter
amniocentesis	a procedure used in fetal diagnosis in which amniotic fluid is removed from the uterus of the pregnant woman
amnion	the membrane that contains a developing embryo and its surrounding fluid
amniotic egg	a type of egg that is produced by reptiles, birds, and egg-laying mammals and that contains a large amount of yolk; usually surrounded by a leathery or hard shell within which the embryo and its embryonic membranes develop
amniotic sac	the sac formed by the amnion
amoebic dysentery	a disease that is caused by an amoeba and that causes inflammation of the intestine
amoebocyte	in sponges and other invertebrates, an amoeba-like cell that moves through the body fluids, removes wastes, and participates in other processes
amoeboid movement	amoeba-like movement; the movement of a cell by the formation of pseudopods
amorphous solid	a solid in which the particles are not arranged with periodicity or order
amphoteric	describes a substance, such as water, that has the properties of an acid and the properties of a base
amplexus	the copulatory embrace of amphibians
amplitude	the maximum distance that the particles of a wave’s medium vibrate from their rest position
amygdala	a structure or body in the form of an almond; an almond-shaped structure located in the brain
amylase	an enzyme that breaks down starches into sugars
anaerobic	describes a process that does not require oxygen
anal fin	a single fin usually located behind the anus of a fish
analogous	in comparisons of different organisms, describes features that are similar in function and appearance but not in structure or origin
analog signal	a signal whose properties, such as amplitude and frequency, can change continuously in a given range
anal pore	in protozoans, an opening from which wastes are eliminated
anaphase	a phase of mitosis and meiosis in which the chromosomes separate
androgen	a hormone that is secreted by the testes and that controls secondary male characteristics
anemia	a condition in which the oxygen-carrying ability of red blood cells is reduced and the production of red blood cells decreases
anemometer	an instrument used to measure wind speed
angiosperm	a flowering plant that produces seeds within a fruit
angle of incidence	the angle between a ray that strikes a surface and the perpendicular to that surface at the point of contact
angle of reflection	the angle formed by the line perpendicular to a surface and the direction in which a reflected ray moves
angular acceleration	the time rate of change of angular velocity expressed in radians per second per second
angular displacement	a change in angular position, described by a rotation around an axis
angular momentum	for a rotating object, the product of the object’s position and linear momentum at the moment the object passes a given point
angular momentum quantum number	the quantum number that indicates the shape of an orbital
angular speed	the rate at which a body rotates about an axis, usually expressed in radians per second
angular unconformity	an unconformity, or break in the geologic record, created when younger sediment is deposited on top of the eroded surface of older rocks that have been tilted or folded
Animalia	the classification kingdom containing complex, multicellular organisms that lack cell walls, are usually able to move around, and possess specialized sense organs that help them quickly respond to their environment
anion	an ion that has a negative charge
annelid	a worm that has ringlike segments, a true coelom, and a closed vascular system, such as an earthworm or a leech
annual	a plant that completes its life cycle, reproduces, and dies within one growing season
annual ring	in secondary xylem (wood), the growth ring formed in one season
anode	the electrode on whose surface oxidation takes place; anions migrate toward the anode, and electrons leave the system from the anode
antacid	a weak base that neutralizes stomach acid
antagonistic hormone	a hormone that counteracts the effect of another hormone
antenna	a feeler that is on the head of an invertebrate, such as a crustacean or an insect, and that senses touch, taste, or smell
antennule	in crustaceans, a second pair of antennae, usually smaller than the first
anterior	the front part of a body or structure
anther	in flowering plants, the tip of a stamen, which contains the pollen sacs where grains form
antheridium	a reproductive structure that produces male sex cells in flowerless and seedless plants
anthracite	one of the hardest forms of coal
anthropoid	an ape that resembles a human; examples include chimpanzees, gorillas, and some ancient apes
anthropoid primate	one of a subgroup of primates that includes monkeys, apes, and humans
antibiotic	a substance that can inhibit the growth of or kill some microorganisms
antibody	a protein that reacts to a specific antigen or that inactivates or destroys toxins
anticline	an arch-shaped fold in rock layers in which the oldest layer is in the center of the fold
anticodon	a region of tRNA that consists of three bases complementary to the codon of mRNA
anticyclone	the rotation of air around a high-pressure center in the direction opposite to Earth's rotation
antigen	a substance that stimulates an immune response
antigen shifting	the production of new antigens by a virus as it mutates over time
antinode	a point in a standing wave, halfway between two nodes; it indicates a position of maximum intensity
antiviral drug	a drug that destroys viruses or prevents their growth or replication
anus	the posterior opening of the digestive tract
aorta	the main artery in the body; it carries blood from the left ventricle to systemic circulation
aortic arch	the bend of the aorta between its ascending and descending portions
aortic valve	the valve that regulates the flow of blood from the left ventricle to the aorta
aphelion	the point in the orbit of a planet at which the planet is farthest from the sun
aphotic zone	the deeper parts of the ocean, where there is so little light that plants cannot carry out photosynthesis
apical dominance	the inhibition of lateral bud growth on the stem of a plant by auxin produced in the terminal bud
apical meristem	the growing region at the tips of stems and roots in plants
apical organ	a ciliated plate located at the back of the larva of an annelid
apogee	in the orbit of a satellite, the point at which the satellite is farthest from Earth
apparent magnitude	the brightness of a star as seen from Earth
appendage	a structure that extends from the main body, such as a limb, tentacle, fin, or wing
appendicular skeleton	the bones of the arms and legs
applied science	the use of science to solve practical problems
aquaculture	the raising of aquatic plants and animals for human use or consumption
aqueous solution	a solution in which water is the solvent
aquifer	a body of rock or sediment that stores groundwater and allows the flow of groundwater
arable land	farmland that can be used to grow crops
arachnid	an arthropod that has eight legs and no wings or antennae; a spider, scorpion, mite, or tick
arachnoid membrane	the middle membrane of the three sacs that surround the brain and spinal cord
Archaea	in a modern taxonomic system, a domain made up of prokaryotes (most of which are known to live in extreme environments) that are distinguished from other prokaryotes by differences in their genetics and in the makeup of their cell wall; this domain aligns with the traditional kingdom Archaebacteria
archaea	prokaryotes (most of which are known to live in extreme environments) that are distinguished from other prokaryotes by differences in their genetics and in the makeup of their cell wall; members of the domain Archaea (singular, archaeon)
Archaebacteria	a kingdom made up of prokaryotes (most of which are known to live in extreme environments) that are distinguished from other prokaryotes by differences in their genetics and in the makeup of their cell wall; currently, biologists prefer to classify members of this kingdom into the domain Archaea
archaebacteria	prokaryotic organisms that are distinguished from other prokaryotes by differences in their genetics and in the makeup of their cell wall; currently, biologists prefer to call these organisms archaea and to classify them into the domain Archaea (singular, archaebacterium)
archegonium	a female reproductive structure of small, nonvascular plants that produces a single egg and in which fertilization and development take place
archenteron	the primitive gastric cavity of an embryo
Archimedes' principle	the principle that states that the buoyant force on an object in a fluid is an upward force equal to the weight of the volume of fluid that the object displaces
area	a measure of the size of a surface or a region
arête	a sharp, jagged ridge that forms between cirques
aromatic hydrocarbon	a member of the class of hydrocarbons (of which benzene is the first member) that consists of assemblages of cyclic conjugated carbon atoms and that is characterized by large resonance energies
Arrhenius acid	a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ions in aqueous solution
Arrhenius base	a substance that increases the concentration of hydroxide ions in aqueous solution
arteriole	a small artery that gives rise to capillaries
artery	a blood vessel that carries blood away from the heart to the body's organs
artesian formation	a sloping layer of permeable rock sandwiched between two layers of impermeable rock and exposed at the surface
artesian spring	a spring whose water flows from a crack in the bed over the artesian aquifer
artesian well	a well whose water comes from an artesian aquifer
arthropod	a member of the phylum Arthropoda, which includes invertebrate animals such as insects, crustaceans, and arachnids; characterized by having segmented bodies and paired appendages
artificial eutrophication	a process that increases the amount of nutrients in a body of water through human activities, such as waste disposal and land drainage
artificial satellite	any human-made object placed in orbit around a body in space
artificial selection	the selective breeding of organisms (by humans) for specific desirable characteristics
artificial transmutation	the transformation of atoms of one element into atoms of another element as a result of a nuclear reaction, such as bombardment with neutrons
asbestos	any of six silicate minerals that form bundles of minute fibers that are heat resistant, flexible, and durable
ascocarp	the reproductive portion of an ascomycete
ascogonium	the female sexual organ or cell in ascomycetes
ascospore	a spore produced in an ascus by ascomycetes
ascus	the spore sac where ascomycetes produce ascospores
asexual reproduction	reproduction that does not involve the union of gametes and in which a single parent produces offspring that are genetically identical to the parent
aspirin	the common name of acetylsalicylic acid, a pain reliever
assortative mating	sexual reproduction in which males and females do not breed randomly
asteroid	a small, rocky object that orbits the sun; most asteroids are located in a band between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter
asteroid belt	the region of the solar system that is between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter and in which most asteroids orbit
asthenosphere	the solid, plastic layer of the mantle beneath the lithosphere; made of mantle rock that flows very slowly, which allows tectonic plates to move on top of it
astronomical unit	the average distance between the Earth and the sun; approximately 150 million kilometers (symbol, AU)
astronomy	the scientific study of the universe
asymmetrical	irregular in shape; without symmetry
asymmetry	a lack of symmetry
atherosclerosis	a disease characterized by the buildup of fatty materials on the interior walls of the arteries
atmosphere	a mixture of gases that surrounds a planet or moon
atmosphere of pressure	the pressure of the Earth's atmosphere at sea level; exactly equivalent to 760 mm Hg
atmospheric pressure	the force per unit area that is exerted on a surface by the weight of the atmosphere
atmospheric transmission	the passage of an electromagnetic wave signal through the atmosphere between a transmitter and a receiver
atoll	a nearly circular coral reef surrounding a lagoon
atom	the smallest unit of an element that maintains the chemical properties of that element
atomic mass	the mass of an atom expressed in atomic mass units
atomic mass unit	a unit of mass that describes the mass of an atom or molecule; it is exactly 1/12 of the mass of a carbon atom with mass number 12 (symbol, amu)
atomic number	the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom; the atomic number is the same for all atoms of an element
atomic radius	one-half of the distance between the center of identical atoms that are not bonded together
ATP	adenosine triphosphate, an organic molecule that acts as the main energy source for cell processes; composed of a nitrogenous base, a sugar, and three phosphate groups
ATP synthetase	an enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of ATP
atriopore	an opening from the atrial cavity to the exterior in certain fish
atrioventricular node	heart tissues that generate the activity that produces heartbeat (abbreviation, AV node)
atrioventricular valve	a one-way valve that separates each atrium from the ventricle beneath it (abbreviation, AV valve)
atrium	a chamber that receives blood that is returning to the heart
attenuated strain	a virus strain that has less potency and that is used in vaccines to produce an immune response
auditory canal	the tube through which air enters the ear
Aufbau principle	the principle that states that the structure of each successive element is obtained by adding one proton to the nucleus of the atom and one electron to the lowest-energy orbital that is available
aurora	colored light produced by charged particles from the solar wind and from the magnetosphere that react with and excite the oxygen and nitrogen of Earth’s upper atmosphere; usually seen in the sky near Earth’s magnetic poles
australopithecine	an early hominid that may have lived more than 3.6 million years ago
autoimmune disease	a disease in which the immune system attacks the organism's own cells
autonomic nervous system	the part of the nervous system that controls involuntary actions
autooxidation	a spontaneous, self-catalyzed oxidation that occurs in the presence of air and that is initiated by factors such as heat or light
autosome	any chromosome that is not a sex chromosome
autotomy	the ability of an organism to drop a body part and, usually, to regenerate a new one
autotroph	an organism that produces its own nutrients from inorganic substances or from the environment instead of consuming other organisms
autumnal equinox	the moment when the sun passes directly above the equator from north to south; day and night are of equal length on the day that the autumnal equinox occurs
auxin	a plant hormone that regulates cell elongation
average atomic mass	the weighted average of the masses of all naturally occurring isotopes of an element
average velocity	the total displacement divided by the time interval during which the displacement occurred
Avogadro's law	the law that states that equal volumes of gases at the same temperature and pressure contain equal numbers of molecules
Avogadro's number	6.02 ¥ 1023, the number of atoms or molecules in 1 mol
axial skeleton	the bones of the skull and vertebral column
axis	an imaginary straight line running through the Earth from pole to pole
axon	an elongated extension of a neuron that carries impulses away from the cell body
azimuthal projection	a map projection that is made by moving the surface features of the globe onto a plane
AZT	azidothymidine, a drug that blocks DNA replication and is useful in the treatment of AIDS